Reshaping dataflows
###################
:date: 2013-02-28 03:12
:author: Fgiesen
:category: Coding

*This post is part of a series - go `here`_ for the index.*

Welcome back! So far, we've spent quite some time "zoomed in" on various
components of the Software Occlusion Culling demo, looking at various
micro-architectural pitfalls and individual loops. In the last two
posts, we "zoomed out" and focused on the big picture: what work runs
when, and how to keep all cores busy. Now, it's time to look at what
lies in between: the plumbing, if you will. We'll be looking at the
dataflows between subsystems and modules and how to improve them.

This is one of my favorite topics in optimization, and it's somewhat
under-appreciated. There's plenty of material on how to make loops run
fast (although a lot of it is outdated or just wrong, so beware), and at
this point there's plenty of ways of getting concurrency up and running:
there's OpenMP, Intel's TBB, Apple's GCD, Windows Thread Pools and
ConcRT for CPU, there's OpenCL, CUDA and DirectCompute for jobs that are
GPU-suitable, and so forth; you get the idea. The point being that it's
not hard to find a shrink-wrap solution that gets you up and running,
and a bit of profiling (like we just did) is usually enough to tell you
what needs to be done to make it all go smoothly.

But back to the topic at hand: improving dataflow. The problem is that,
unlike the other two aspects I mentioned, there's really no recipe to
follow; it's very much context-dependent. It basically boils down to
looking at both sides of the interface between systems and functions and
figuring out if there's a better way to handle that interaction. We've
seen a bit of that earlier when talking about frustum culling; rather
than trying to define it in words, I'll just do it by example, so let's
dive right in!

A simple example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A good example is the member variable
``TransformedAABBoxSSE::mVisible``, declared like this:

::

    bool *mVisible;

A pointer to a bool. So where does that pointer come from?

::

    inline void SetVisible(bool *visible){mVisible = visible;}

It turns out that the constructor initializes this pointer to ``NULL``,
and the only method that ever does anything with ``mVisible`` is
``RasterizeAndDepthTestAABBox``, which executes ``*mVisible = true;`` if
the bounding box is found to be visible. So how does this all get used?

::

    mpVisible[i] = false;mpTransformedAABBox[i].SetVisible(&mpVisible[i]);if(...){    mpTransformedAABBox[i].TransformAABBox();    mpTransformedAABBox[i].RasterizeAndDepthTestAABBox(...);}

That's it. That's the only call sites. There's really no reason for
``mVisible`` to be state - semantically, it's just a return value for
``RasterizeAndDepthTestAABBox``, so that's what it should be - *always*
try to get rid of superfluous state. This doesn't even have anything to
do with optimization per se; explicit dataflow is easy for programmers
to see and reason about, while implicit dataflow (through pointers,
members and state) is hard to follow (both for humans and compilers!)
and error-prone.

Anyway, making this return value explicit is really basic, so I'm not
gonna walk through the details; you can always look at the
`corresponding commit`_. I won't bother benchmarking this change either.

A more interesting case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the depth test rasterizer, right after determining the bounding box,
there's this piece of code:

::

    for(int vv = 0; vv < 3; vv++) {    // If W (holding 1/w in our case) is not between 0 and 1,    // then vertex is behind near clip plane (1.0 in our case).    // If W < 1 (for W>0), and 1/W < 0 (for W < 0).    VecF32 nearClipMask0 = cmple(xformedPos[vv].W, VecF32(0.0f));    VecF32 nearClipMask1 = cmpge(xformedPos[vv].W, VecF32(1.0f));    VecS32 nearClipMask = float2bits(or(nearClipMask0,        nearClipMask1));    if(!is_all_zeros(nearClipMask))    {        // All four vertices are behind the near plane (we're        // processing four triangles at a time w/ SSE)        return true;    }}

Okay. The transform code sets things up so that the "w" component of the
screen-space positions actually contains 1/w; the first part of this
code then tries to figure out whether the source vertex was in front of
the near plane (i.e. outside the view frustum or not). An ugly wrinkle
here is that the near plane is hard-coded to be at 1. Doing this after
dividing by w adds extra complications since the code needs to be
careful about the signs. And the second comment is outright wrong - it
in fact early-outs when *any* of the four active triangles have vertex
number ``vv`` outside the near-clip plane, not when all of them do. In
other words, if any of the 4 active triangles get near-clipped, the test
rasterizer will just punt and return ``true`` ("visible").

So here's the thing: there's really no reason to do this check *after*
we're done with triangle setup. Nor do we even have to gather the 3
triangle vertices to discover that one of them is in front of the near
plane. A box has 8 vertices, and we'll know whether any of them are in
front of the near plane as soon as we're done transforming them, before
we even think about triangle setup! So let's look at the function that
transforms the vertices:

::

    void TransformedAABBoxSSE::TransformAABBox(){    for(UINT i = 0; i < AABB_VERTICES; i++)    {        mpXformedPos[i] = TransformCoords(&mpBBVertexList[i],            mCumulativeMatrix);        float oneOverW = 1.0f/max(mpXformedPos[i].m128_f32[3],            0.0000001f);        mpXformedPos[i] = mpXformedPos[i] * oneOverW;        mpXformedPos[i].m128_f32[3] = oneOverW;    }}

As we can see, returning 1/w does in fact take a bit of extra work, so
we'd like to avoid it, especially since that 1/w is really only
referenced by the near-clip checking code. Also, the code seems to clamp
w at some arbitrary small positive value - which means that the part of
the near clip computation in the depth test rasterizer that worries
about w<0 is actually unnecessary. This is the kind of thing I'm talking
about - each piece of code in isolation seems reasonable, but once you
look at both sides it becomes clear that the pieces don't fit together
all that well.

It turns out that after ``TransformCoords``, we're in "homogeneous
viewport space", i.e. we're still in a homogeneous space, but unlike the
homogeneous clip space you might be used to from vertex shaders, this
one also has the viewport transform baked in. But our viewport transform
leaves z alone (we fixed that in the previous post!), so we still have a
D3D-style clip volume for z:

$latex 0 \\le z \\le w$

Since we're using a reversed clip volume, the z≤w constraint is the
near-plane one. Note that *this* test doesn't need any special cases for
negative signs and also doesn't have a hardcoded near-plane location any
more: it just automatically uses `whatever the projection matrix says`_,
which is the right thing to do!

Even better, if we test for near-clip anyway, there's no need to clamp w
at all. We know that anything with w≤0 is outside the near plane, and if
a vertex is outside the near plane we're not gonna rasterize the box
anyway. Now we might still end up dividing by 0, but since we're dealing
with floats, this is a well-defined operation (it might return
infinities or NaNs, but that's fine).

And on the subject of not rasterizing the box: as I said earlier, as
soon as one vertex is outside the near-plane, we know we're going to
return ``true`` from the depth test rasterizer, so there's no point even
starting the operation. To facilitate this, we just make
``TransformAABBox`` return whether the box should be rasterized or not.
Putting it all together:

::

    bool TransformedAABBoxSSE::TransformAABBox(){    __m128 zAllIn = _mm_castsi128_ps(_mm_set1_epi32(~0));    for(UINT i = 0; i < AABB_VERTICES; i++)    {        __m128 vert = TransformCoords(&mpBBVertexList[i],            mCumulativeMatrix);        // We have inverted z; z is inside of near plane iff z <= w.        __m128 vertZ = _mm_shuffle_ps(vert, vert, 0xaa); //vert.zzzz        __m128 vertW = _mm_shuffle_ps(vert, vert, 0xff); //vert.wwww        __m128 zIn = _mm_cmple_ps(vertZ, vertW);        zAllIn = _mm_and_ps(zAllIn, zIn);        // project        mpXformedPos[i] = _mm_div_ps(vert, vertW);    }    // return true if and only if all verts inside near plane    return _mm_movemask_ps(zAllIn) == 0xf;}

In case you're wondering why this code uses raw SSE intrinsics and not
``VecF32``, it's because I'm purposefully trying to keep anything
depending on the SIMD width out of ``VecF32``, which makes it a lot
easier to go to 8-wide AVX should we want to at some point. But this
code really uses 4-vectors of (x,y,z,w) and needs to do shuffles, so it
doesn't fit in that model and I want to keep it separate. But the actual
logic is just what I described.

And once we have this return value from ``TransformAABBox``, we get to
remove the near-clip test from the depth test rasterizer, *and* we get
to move our early-out for near-clipped boxes all the way to the call
site:

::

    if(mpTransformedAABBox[i].TransformAABBox())    mpVisible[i] = mpTransformedAABBox[i].RasterizeAndDepthTestAABBox(...);else    mpVisible[i] = true;

So, the ``oneOverW`` hack, the clamping hack and the hard-coded near
plane are gone. That's already a victory in terms of code quality, but
did it improve the run time?

**Change:** Transform/early-out fixes

.. raw:: html

   <table>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Depth test

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

min

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

25th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

med

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

75th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

max

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

mean

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

sdev

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Start

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.109

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.152

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.166

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.182

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.240

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.167

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.022

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Transform fixes

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.054

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.092

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.112

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.146

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.016

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Another 0.06ms off our median depth test time, which may not sound big
but is over 5% of what's left of it at this point.

Getting warmer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The bounding box rasterizer has one more method that's called per-box
though, and this is one that really deserves some special attention.
Meet ``IsTooSmall``:

::

    bool TransformedAABBoxSSE::IsTooSmall(__m128 *pViewMatrix,    __m128 *pProjMatrix, CPUTCamera *pCamera){    float radius = mBBHalf.lengthSq(); // Use length-squared to    // avoid sqrt().  Relative comparisons hold.    float fov = pCamera->GetFov();    float tanOfHalfFov = tanf(fov * 0.5f);    MatrixMultiply(mWorldMatrix, pViewMatrix, mCumulativeMatrix);    MatrixMultiply(mCumulativeMatrix, pProjMatrix,        mCumulativeMatrix);    MatrixMultiply(mCumulativeMatrix, mViewPortMatrix,        mCumulativeMatrix);    __m128 center = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, mBBCenter.z, mBBCenter.y,        mBBCenter.x);    __m128 mBBCenterOSxForm = TransformCoords(&center,        mCumulativeMatrix);    float w = mBBCenterOSxForm.m128_f32[3];    if( w > 1.0f )    {        float radiusDivW = radius / w;        float r2DivW2DivTanFov = radiusDivW / tanOfHalfFov;        return r2DivW2DivTanFov <            (mOccludeeSizeThreshold * mOccludeeSizeThreshold);    }    return false;}

Note that ``MatrixMultiply(A, B, C)`` performs ``C = A * B``; the rest
should be easy enough to figure out from the code. Now there's really
several problems with this function, so let's go straight to a list:

-  ``radius`` (which is really radius squared) only depends on
   ``mBBHalf``, which is fixed at initialization time. There's no need
   to recompute it every time.
-  Similarly, ``fov`` and ``tanOfHalfFov`` only depend on the camera,
   and absolutely do not need to be recomputed once for every box. This
   is what gave us the ``_tan_pentium4`` cameo all the way back in
   `"Frustum culling: turning the crank"`_, by the way.
-  The view matrix, projection matrix and viewport matrix are also all
   camera or global constants. Again, no need to multiply these together
   for every box - the only matrix that is different between boxes is
   the very first one, the world matrix, and since matrix multiplication
   is associative, we can just concatenate the other three once.
-  There's also no need for ``mOccludeeSizeThreshold`` to be squared
   every time - we can do that once.
-  Nor is there a need for it to be stored per box, since it's a global
   constant owned by the depth test rasterizer.
-  ``(radius / w) / tanOfHalfFov`` would be better computed as
   ``radius / (w * tanOfHalfFov)``.
-  But more importantly, since all we're doing is a compare and both
   ``w`` and ``tanOfHalfFov`` are positive, we can just multiply through
   by them and get rid of the divide altogether.

All these things are common problems that I must have fixed a hundred
times, but I have to admit that it's pretty rare to see so many of them
in a single page of code. Anyway, rather than fixing these one by one,
let's just cut to the chase: instead of all the redundant computations,
we just move everything that only depends on the camera (or is global)
into a single struct that holds our setup, which I dubbed
``BoxTestSetup``. Here's the code:

::

    struct BoxTestSetup{    __m128 mViewProjViewport[4];    float radiusThreshold;    void Init(const __m128 viewMatrix[4],        const __m128 projMatrix[4], CPUTCamera *pCamera,        float occludeeSizeThreshold);};void BoxTestSetup::Init(const __m128 viewMatrix[4],    const __m128 projMatrix[4], CPUTCamera *pCamera,    float occludeeSizeThreshold){    // viewportMatrix is a global float4x4; we need a __m128[4]    __m128 viewPortMatrix[4];    viewPortMatrix[0] = _mm_loadu_ps((float*)&viewportMatrix.r0);    viewPortMatrix[1] = _mm_loadu_ps((float*)&viewportMatrix.r1);    viewPortMatrix[2] = _mm_loadu_ps((float*)&viewportMatrix.r2);    viewPortMatrix[3] = _mm_loadu_ps((float*)&viewportMatrix.r3);    MatrixMultiply(viewMatrix, projMatrix, mViewProjViewport);    MatrixMultiply(mViewProjViewport, viewPortMatrix,        mViewProjViewport);    float fov = pCamera->GetFov();    float tanOfHalfFov = tanf(fov * 0.5f);    radiusThreshold = occludeeSizeThreshold * occludeeSizeThreshold        * tanOfHalfFov;}

This is initialized once we start culling and simply kept on the stack.
Then we just pass it to ``IsTooSmall``, which after our `surgery`_ looks
like this:

::

    bool TransformedAABBoxSSE::IsTooSmall(const BoxTestSetup &setup){    MatrixMultiply(mWorldMatrix, setup.mViewProjViewport,        mCumulativeMatrix);    __m128 center = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, mBBCenter.z, mBBCenter.y,        mBBCenter.x);    __m128 mBBCenterOSxForm = TransformCoords(&center,        mCumulativeMatrix);    float w = mBBCenterOSxForm.m128_f32[3];    if( w > 1.0f )    {        return mRadiusSq < w * setup.radiusThreshold;    }    return false;}

Wow, that method sure seems to have lost a few pounds. Let's run the
numbers:

**Change:** IsTooSmall cleanup

.. raw:: html

   <table>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Depth test

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

min

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

25th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

med

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

75th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

max

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

mean

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

sdev

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Start

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.109

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.152

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.166

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.182

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.240

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.167

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.022

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Transform fixes

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.054

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.092

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.112

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.146

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.016

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

IsTooSmall cleanup

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.860

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.893

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.908

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.917

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.954

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.905

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.018

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Another 0.2ms off the median run time, bringing our total reduction for
this post to about 22%. So are we done? Not yet!

The state police
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently, each ``TransformedAABBoxSSE`` still keeps its own copy of the
cumulative transform matrix and a copy of its transformed vertices. But
it's not necessary for these to be persistent - we compute them once,
use them to rasterize the box, then don't look at them again until the
next frame. So, like ``mVisible`` earlier, there's really no need to
keep them around as state; instead, it's better to just store them on
the stack. Less pointers per ``TransformedAABBoxSSE``, less cache
misses, and - perhaps most important of all - it makes the bounding box
objects themselves stateless. Granted, that's the case only because our
world is perfectly static and nothing is animated at runtime, but still,
stateless is good! Stateless is easier to read, easier to debug, and
easier to test.

Again, this is another change that is purely mechanical - just pass in a
pointer to ``cumulativeMatrix`` and ``xformedPos`` to the functions that
want them. So this time, I'm just going to refer you directly to the
`two`_ `commits`_ that implement this idea, and skip straight to the
results:

**Change:** Reduce amount of state

.. raw:: html

   <table>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Depth test

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

min

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

25th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

med

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

75th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

max

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

mean

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

sdev

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Start

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.109

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.152

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.166

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.182

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.240

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.167

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.022

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Transform fixes

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.054

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.092

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.112

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.146

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.016

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

IsTooSmall cleanup

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.860

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.893

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.908

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.917

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.954

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.905

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.018

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Reduce state

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.834

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.862

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.873

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.886

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.938

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.875

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.017

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

Only about 0.03ms this time, but we also save 192 bytes (plus allocator
overhead) worth of memory per box, which is a nice bonus. And anyway,
we're not done yet, because I have one more!

It's more fun to compute
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There's one more piece of unnecessary data we currently store per
bounding box: the vertex list, initialized in
``CreateAABBVertexIndexList``:

::

    float3 min = mBBCenter - bbHalf;float3 max = mBBCenter + bbHalf;    //Top 4 vertices in BBmpBBVertexList[0] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, max.z, max.y, max.x);mpBBVertexList[1] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, max.z, max.y, min.x); mpBBVertexList[2] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, min.z, max.y, min.x);mpBBVertexList[3] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, min.z, max.y, max.x);// Bottom 4 vertices in BBmpBBVertexList[4] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, min.z, min.y, max.x);mpBBVertexList[5] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, max.z, min.y, max.x);mpBBVertexList[6] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, max.z, min.y, min.x);mpBBVertexList[7] = _mm_set_ps(1.0f, min.z, min.y, min.x);

This is, in effect, just treating the bounding box as a general mesh.
But that's extremely wasteful - we already store center and half-extent,
the min/max corner positions are trivial to reconstruct from that
information, and all the other vertices can be constructed by splicing
min/max together componentwise using a set of masks that is the same for
all bounding boxes. So these 8\*16 = 128 bytes of vertex data really
don't pay their way.

But more importantly, note that the we only ever use two distinct values
for x, y and z each. Now ``TransformAABBox``, which we already saw
above, uses ``TransformCoords`` to compute the matrix-vector product
``v*M`` with the cumulative transform matrix, using the expression

``v.x * M.row[0] + v.y * M.row[1] + v.z * M.row[2] + M.row[3]`` (v.w is
assumed to be 1)

and because we know that ``v.x`` is either ``min.x`` or ``max.x``, we
can multiply both by ``M.row[0]`` once and store the result. Then the 8
individual vertices can skip the multiplies altogether. Putting it all
together leads to the following new code for ``TransformAABBox``:

::

    // 0 = use min corner, 1 = use max cornerstatic const int sBBxInd[AABB_VERTICES] = { 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0 };static const int sBByInd[AABB_VERTICES] = { 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0 };static const int sBBzInd[AABB_VERTICES] = { 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0 };bool TransformedAABBoxSSE::TransformAABBox(__m128 xformedPos[],    const __m128 cumulativeMatrix[4]){    // w ends up being garbage, but it doesn't matter - we ignore    // it anyway.    __m128 vCenter = _mm_loadu_ps(&mBBCenter.x);    __m128 vHalf   = _mm_loadu_ps(&mBBHalf.x);    __m128 vMin    = _mm_sub_ps(vCenter, vHalf);    __m128 vMax    = _mm_add_ps(vCenter, vHalf);    // transforms    __m128 xRow[2], yRow[2], zRow[2];    xRow[0] = _mm_shuffle_ps(vMin, vMin, 0x00) * cumulativeMatrix[0];    xRow[1] = _mm_shuffle_ps(vMax, vMax, 0x00) * cumulativeMatrix[0];    yRow[0] = _mm_shuffle_ps(vMin, vMin, 0x55) * cumulativeMatrix[1];    yRow[1] = _mm_shuffle_ps(vMax, vMax, 0x55) * cumulativeMatrix[1];    zRow[0] = _mm_shuffle_ps(vMin, vMin, 0xaa) * cumulativeMatrix[2];    zRow[1] = _mm_shuffle_ps(vMax, vMax, 0xaa) * cumulativeMatrix[2];    __m128 zAllIn = _mm_castsi128_ps(_mm_set1_epi32(~0));    for(UINT i = 0; i < AABB_VERTICES; i++)    {        // Transform the vertex        __m128 vert = cumulativeMatrix[3];        vert += xRow[sBBxInd[i]];        vert += yRow[sBByInd[i]];        vert += zRow[sBBzInd[i]];        // We have inverted z; z is inside of near plane iff z <= w.        __m128 vertZ = _mm_shuffle_ps(vert, vert, 0xaa); //vert.zzzz        __m128 vertW = _mm_shuffle_ps(vert, vert, 0xff); //vert.wwww        __m128 zIn = _mm_cmple_ps(vertZ, vertW);        zAllIn = _mm_and_ps(zAllIn, zIn);        // project        xformedPos[i] = _mm_div_ps(vert, vertW);    }    // return true if and only if none of the verts are z-clipped    return _mm_movemask_ps(zAllIn) == 0xf;}

Admittedly, quite a bit longer than the original one, but that's because
we front-load a lot of the computation; most of the per-vertex work done
in ``TransformCoords`` is gone. And here's our reward:

**Change:** Get rid of per-box vertex list

.. raw:: html

   <table>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

Depth test

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

min

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

25th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

med

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

75th

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

max

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

mean

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   <th>

sdev

.. raw:: html

   </th>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Start

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.109

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.152

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.166

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.182

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.240

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.167

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.022

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Transform fixes

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.054

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.092

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.112

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.146

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

1.102

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.016

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

IsTooSmall cleanup

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.860

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.893

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.908

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.917

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.954

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.905

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.018

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Reduce state

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.834

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.862

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.873

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.886

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.938

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.875

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.017

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   <tr>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

Remove vert list

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.801

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.823

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.830

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.839

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.867

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.831

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   <td>

0.012

.. raw:: html

   </td>

.. raw:: html

   </tr>

.. raw:: html

   </table>

This brings our total for this post to a nearly 25% reduction in median
depth test time, plus about 320 bytes memory reduction per
``TransformedAABBoxSSE`` - which, since we have about 27000 of them,
works out to well over 8 megabytes. Such are the rewards for widening
the scope beyond optimizing functions by themselves.

And as usual, the code for this time (plus some changes I haven't
discussed yet) is up on `Github`_. Until next time!

.. _here: http://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2013/02/17/optimizing-sw-occlusion-culling-index/
.. _corresponding commit: https://github.com/rygorous/intel_occlusion_cull/commit/36fed2dd3d098e4cace8adec67a415139a0049dd
.. _whatever the projection matrix says: http://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2012/08/31/frustum-planes-from-the-projection-matrix/
.. _`"Frustum culling: turning the crank"`: http://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2013/02/02/frustum-culling-turning-the-crank/
.. _surgery: https://github.com/rygorous/intel_occlusion_cull/commit/2411249a28f9918fc574648d5c79af2fe702c1f8
.. _two: https://github.com/rygorous/intel_occlusion_cull/commit/0fad7d4fb406eb57a45d59ed2187fbddffe08bc7
.. _commits: https://github.com/rygorous/intel_occlusion_cull/commit/028a108d36b8bdb0d883d5baf82d1e922dd00fd1
.. _Github: https://github.com/rygorous/intel_occlusion_cull/tree/blog
